rs016-poweb.md, before:

---
permalink: /RS-016
---
# PoWeb: Parcel Delivery over HTTP and WebSockets, Version 1
{: .no_toc }

- Id: RS-016.
- Status: Working draft.
- Type: Implementation.
- Reference implementations: [client](https://github.com/relaycorp/relaynet-poweb-js), [server](https://github.com/relaycorp/relaynet-internet-gateway/tree/master/src/services/poweb).

## Abstract
{: .no_toc }

This document describes _PoWeb_, a binding for local [Parcel Delivery Connections (PDC)](rs000-core.md#parcel-delivery-binding) on top of the HTTP and [WebSockets (RFC-6455)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6455) protocols.

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Introduction

As a local PDC, the ultimate objective of PoWeb is to enable a gateway to relay parcels for its private endpoints or its private peers. In other words, a private gateway would implement a PoWeb service to exchange parcels with its local endpoints, whilst a public gateway would implement a PoWeb service to exchange parcels with its private gateways.

PoWeb owes its name to the fact it uses Web-based, Application Layer protocols with its clients: HTTP for remote procedure calls, and WebSockets to stream messages (e.g., parcels). This specification describes the HTTP and WebSocket endpoints that comprise PoWeb, along with their inputs, outputs and any side effects. The serialisation format of the messages exchanged via this protocol are outside the scope of this document, as they are agnostic of the concrete PDC binding.

The private or public gateway implementing the PoWeb service will be referred to as the "server", whilst the private endpoint or private gateway connecting to its will be referred to as the "client".

Clients are required to register their endpoints with the gateway before they can start exchanging messages (e.g., parcels), given that those operations require the client to produce digital signatures using [Relaynet PKI](rs002-pki.md) certificates previously issued by the server.

## Endpoints

The server MUST expose each PoWeb endpoint under a common URL prefix ending with the path `/v1` (e.g., `https://gateway.com/v1`). Such prefixes MAY include paths and non-standard ports (e.g., `https://gateway.com:1234/path/v1`).

### Private node registration

The process to register private nodes is split in two parts, at the end of which -- if successful -- the server will issue a certificate for the private node.

The client MUST initiate the registration process by making a pre-registration request. This preliminary step is used to give the client a nonce to sign, thus avoiding replay attacks. Servers MUST implement the pre-registration endpoint described in this document, unless the server is part of a private gateway on a mobile platform, in which case it MUST implement a platform-specific method that also authenticates the app that owns the endpoint. Pre-registration on mobile platforms is outside the scope of this document.

If the server approves the pre-registration, it MUST output a single-use _Private Node Registration Authorisation_ (PNRA) that expires in less than 10 seconds. To complete the registration, the client MUST make a registration request by passing the PNRA signed with the private node's key which, if successful, will result in the server issuing a certificate.

#### Pre-registration endpoint

To pre-register a private node, the client MUST make a POST request to `/pre-registration` with the SHA-256 hexadecimal digest of the private node's public key. The request Content-Type MUST be `text/plain`. The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- A `200 OK` if the pre-registration is authorised. The response body MUST be the PNRA and the Content-Type MUST be `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.authorization`.
- A `400 Bad Request` if the client did not adhere to the requirements above.

Servers SHOULD refuse request bodies larger than 64 octets.

#### Registration endpoint

To complete the registration, the client MUST produce a _Private Node Registration Request_ (PNRR) by signing the PNRA with the key of the node being registered. The PNRR MUST then be sent in the body of a POST request to `/nodes`, using the Content-Type `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.request`.

The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- `200 OK` if the registration was successfully completed. The response body MUST be a _Private Node Registration_ (PNR), which encapsulates the newly-issued certificate for the private endpoint, as well as the certificate for the underlying gateway behind the server. The response Content-Type MUST be `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.registration`.
- `400 Bad Request` if the PNRR sent by the client is malformed or its digital signature is invalid.
- `403 Forbidden` if the client is using a PNRA issued for a different private node.

Servers SHOULD refuse request bodies larger than 1 MiB.

### Parcel delivery

To deliver a parcel to the server, the client MUST send the parcel in the body of a POST request to `/parcels` using the Content-Type `application/vnd.relaynet.parcel`. Additionally, it MUST countersign the parcel with the private node's keys and include the base64 encoding of the resulting digital signature in the `Authorization` header, using the `Relaynet-Countersignature` type.

The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- `202 Accepted` if the parcel and its countersignature are both valid, and the parcel was successfully stored or forwarded.
- `400 Bad Request` if the parcel is malformed.
- `401 Unauthorized` if the countersignature was missing or invalid.
- `403 Forbidden` if the parcel was well-formed but invalid; e.g., the [RAMF](rs001-ramf.md) signature verification failed.

### Parcel collection

To collect parcels from the server, the client MUST start a WebSocket connection with the endpoint `/parcel-collection`. The client MAY optionally specify whether the server should close the connection as soon as all queued parcels have been collected by setting the HTTP request header `X-Relaynet-Streaming-Mode` to `close-upon-completion`; otherwise, the server will try to keep the connection open indefinitely.

The server MUST send a challenge message to the client as soon as the connection starts. This challenge MUST encapsulate a cryptographic nonce. The client MUST reply to the challenge by sending a response that encapsulates the digital signatures for the nonce using the keys for each private node on whose behalf parcels will be collected. The digital signatures MUST meet the following requirements:

- They MUST be DER-encoded, CMS SignedData values and be validated in accordance to [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652).
- The signer's certificate MUST be encapsulated. Other certificates SHOULD NOT be encapsulated.
- The signer's certificate MUST be issued by the underlying gateway behind the server.
- The signed content MUST NOT be encapsulated.

The server MUST close the WebSocket connection with the status code `1003` if there are no signatures or at least one of the signatures does not meet any of the requirements above.

If the handshake is completed successfully, the server MUST send any queued parcels to the client, and the client MUST send an acknowledgement message back to the server for each parcel that is successfully stored or forwarded. Upon reception of each acknowledgement, the server MUST delete the parcel immediately or schedule its deletion.

Finally, the server MUST close the connection with the status code `1000` if the client set the HTTP request header `X-Relaynet-Streaming-Mode` to `close-upon-completion` and all parcels were send and acknowledged. Otherwise, both peers SHOULD try to keep the connection open indefinitely, and the server MUST send any new parcels as soon as they are received.

## Undocumented HTTP status codes

The server MAY return any of the following status codes, but their semantics are not within the scope of this document:

- Any other code in the range 400-499 that the implementer or operator of the server deems appropriate but is not explicitly documented in the respective endpoint. The client SHOULD NOT try to make the same request later.
- Any code in the range 500-599 that the implementer or operator of the server deems appropriate. The client SHOULD try to make the same request later.

## Port numbers

If the server is a private gateway, it SHOULD listen on port 276 if it has the appropriate permissions to do so. If not, it SHOULD listen on port 13276.

If the server is a public gateway, it SHOULD listen on port 443.

## WebSocket Considerations

Clients and servers implementing this specification MUST support HTTP version 1.1.

Both the client and the server SHOULD send each other _ping_ messages and they MUST respond with a _pong_ message for every ping they receive.

## Security Considerations

To prevent web pages from trying to make unauthorised requests to the server of a private gateway, the server MUST NOT support CORS and WebSocket connections MUST be refused with the status code `1008` if the HTTP request included the header `Origin`.

## Relevant Specifications

[Relaynet Core (RS-000)](rs000-core.md) defines the requirements for [message transport bindings](rs000-core.md#message-transport-bindings) in general and [parcel delivery bindings](rs000-core.md#parcel-delivery-binding) specifically, all of which apply to PoWeb. [Relaynet PKI (RS-002)](rs002-pki.md) is also particularly relevant to this specification.

Commit message:

Core: Use SRV records to resolve public addresses
Fixes #26

rs016-poweb.md, after:

---
permalink: /RS-016
---
# PoWeb: Parcel Delivery over HTTP and WebSockets, Version 1
{: .no_toc }

- Id: RS-016.
- Status: Working draft.
- Type: Implementation.
- Reference implementations: [client](https://github.com/relaycorp/relaynet-poweb-js), [server](https://github.com/relaycorp/relaynet-internet-gateway/tree/master/src/services/poweb).

## Abstract
{: .no_toc }

This document describes _PoWeb_, a binding for [Gateway Synchronization Connections (GSC)](rs000-core.md#gateway-synchronization-binding) on top of the HTTP and [WebSockets (RFC-6455)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6455) protocols.

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Introduction

As a GSC, the ultimate objective of PoWeb is to enable a gateway to relay parcels for its private endpoints or its private peers. In other words, a private gateway would implement a PoWeb service to exchange parcels with its local endpoints, whilst a public gateway would implement a PoWeb service to exchange parcels with its private gateways.

PoWeb owes its name to the fact it uses Web-based, Application Layer protocols with its clients: HTTP for remote procedure calls, and WebSockets to stream messages (e.g., parcels). This specification describes the HTTP and WebSocket endpoints that comprise PoWeb, along with their inputs, outputs and any side effects. The serialisation format of the messages exchanged via this protocol are outside the scope of this document, as they are agnostic of the concrete GSC binding.

The private or public gateway implementing the PoWeb service will be referred to as the "server", whilst the private endpoint or private gateway connecting to its will be referred to as the "client".

Clients are required to register their endpoints with the gateway before they can start exchanging messages (e.g., parcels), given that those operations require the client to produce digital signatures using [Relaynet PKI](rs002-pki.md) certificates previously issued by the server.

## Endpoints

The server MUST expose each PoWeb endpoint under a common URL prefix ending with the path `/v1` (e.g., `https://gateway.com/v1`). Such prefixes MAY include paths and non-standard ports (e.g., `https://gateway.com:1234/path/v1`).

### Private node registration

The process to register private nodes is split in two parts, at the end of which -- if successful -- the server will issue a certificate for the private node.

The client MUST initiate the registration process by making a pre-registration request. This preliminary step is used to give the client a nonce to sign, thus avoiding replay attacks. Servers MUST implement the pre-registration endpoint described in this document, unless the server is part of a private gateway on a mobile platform, in which case it MUST implement a platform-specific method that also authenticates the app that owns the endpoint. Pre-registration on mobile platforms is outside the scope of this document.

If the server approves the pre-registration, it MUST output a single-use _Private Node Registration Authorisation_ (PNRA) that expires in less than 10 seconds. To complete the registration, the client MUST make a registration request by passing the PNRA signed with the private node's key which, if successful, will result in the server issuing a certificate.

#### Pre-registration endpoint

To pre-register a private node, the client MUST make a POST request to `/pre-registration` with the SHA-256 hexadecimal digest of the private node's public key. The request Content-Type MUST be `text/plain`. The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- A `200 OK` if the pre-registration is authorised. The response body MUST be the PNRA and the Content-Type MUST be `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.authorization`.
- A `400 Bad Request` if the client did not adhere to the requirements above.

Servers SHOULD refuse request bodies larger than 64 octets.

#### Registration endpoint

To complete the registration, the client MUST produce a _Private Node Registration Request_ (PNRR) by signing the PNRA with the key of the node being registered. The PNRR MUST then be sent in the body of a POST request to `/nodes`, using the Content-Type `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.request`.

The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- `200 OK` if the registration was successfully completed. The response body MUST be a _Private Node Registration_ (PNR), which encapsulates the newly-issued certificate for the private endpoint, as well as the certificate for the underlying gateway behind the server. The response Content-Type MUST be `application/vnd.relaynet.node-registration.registration`.
- `400 Bad Request` if the PNRR sent by the client is malformed or its digital signature is invalid.
- `403 Forbidden` if the client is using a PNRA issued for a different private node.

Servers SHOULD refuse request bodies larger than 1 MiB.

### Parcel delivery

To deliver a parcel to the server, the client MUST send the parcel in the body of a POST request to `/parcels` using the Content-Type `application/vnd.relaynet.parcel`. Additionally, it MUST countersign the parcel with the private node's keys and include the base64 encoding of the resulting digital signature in the `Authorization` header, using the `Relaynet-Countersignature` type.

The server MUST respond with one of the following:

- `202 Accepted` if the parcel and its countersignature are both valid, and the parcel was successfully stored or forwarded.
- `400 Bad Request` if the parcel is malformed.
- `401 Unauthorized` if the countersignature was missing or invalid.
- `403 Forbidden` if the parcel was well-formed but invalid; e.g., the [RAMF](rs001-ramf.md) signature verification failed.

### Parcel collection

To collect parcels from the server, the client MUST start a WebSocket connection with the endpoint `/parcel-collection`. The client MAY optionally specify whether the server should close the connection as soon as all queued parcels have been collected by setting the HTTP request header `X-Relaynet-Streaming-Mode` to `close-upon-completion`; otherwise, the server will try to keep the connection open indefinitely.

The server MUST send a challenge message to the client as soon as the connection starts. This challenge MUST encapsulate a cryptographic nonce. The client MUST reply to the challenge by sending a response that encapsulates the digital signatures for the nonce using the keys for each private node on whose behalf parcels will be collected. The digital signatures MUST meet the following requirements:

- They MUST be DER-encoded, CMS SignedData values and be validated in accordance to [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652).
- The signer's certificate MUST be encapsulated. Other certificates SHOULD NOT be encapsulated.
- The signer's certificate MUST be issued by the underlying gateway behind the server.
- The signed content MUST NOT be encapsulated.

The server MUST close the WebSocket connection with the status code `1003` if there are no signatures or at least one of the signatures does not meet any of the requirements above.

If the handshake is completed successfully, the server MUST send any queued parcels to the client, and the client MUST send an acknowledgement message back to the server for each parcel that is successfully stored or forwarded. Upon reception of each acknowledgement, the server MUST delete the parcel immediately or schedule its deletion.

Finally, the server MUST close the connection with the status code `1000` if the client set the HTTP request header `X-Relaynet-Streaming-Mode` to `close-upon-completion` and all parcels were send and acknowledged. Otherwise, both peers SHOULD try to keep the connection open indefinitely, and the server MUST send any new parcels as soon as they are received.

## Undocumented HTTP status codes

The server MAY return any of the following status codes, but their semantics are not within the scope of this document:

- Any other code in the range 400-499 that the implementer or operator of the server deems appropriate but is not explicitly documented in the respective endpoint. The client SHOULD NOT try to make the same request later.
- Any code in the range 500-599 that the implementer or operator of the server deems appropriate. The client SHOULD try to make the same request later.

## Port numbers

If the server is a private gateway, it SHOULD listen on port 276 if it has the appropriate permissions to do so. If not, it SHOULD listen on port 13276.

If the server is a public gateway, it SHOULD listen on port 443.

## WebSocket Considerations

Clients and servers implementing this specification MUST support HTTP version 1.1.

Both the client and the server SHOULD send each other _ping_ messages and they MUST respond with a _pong_ message for every ping they receive.

## Security Considerations

To prevent web pages from trying to make unauthorised requests to the server of a private gateway, the server MUST NOT support CORS and WebSocket connections MUST be refused with the status code `1008` if the HTTP request included the header `Origin`.

## Public Gateway SRV records

Because this binding uses the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP; [RFC 793](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc793)), SRV records for GSC servers implementing this binding MUST use the `tcp` protocol.

For example, a public gateway like `example.com` could specify an SRV record as follows:

```
_rgsc._tcp.example.com. 300 IN SRV 0 1 443 relaynet-gateway-gsc.example.com.
```

## Relevant Specifications

[Relaynet Core (RS-000)](rs000-core.md) defines the requirements for [message transport bindings](rs000-core.md#message-transport-bindings) in general and [parcel delivery bindings](rs000-core.md#parcel-delivery-binding) specifically, all of which apply to PoWeb. [Relaynet PKI (RS-002)](rs002-pki.md) is also particularly relevant to this specification.
